feat(treesitter): async parsing (#31631)
neovim/neovim: runtime/doc/news.txt

  if no languages are explicitly registered.
• |vim.treesitter.language.add()| returns `true` if a parser was loaded
  successfully and `nil,errmsg` otherwise instead of throwing an error.
• |vim.treesitter.get_parser()| and |vim.treesitter.start()| no longer parse
  the tree before returning. Scripts must call |LanguageTree:parse()| explicitly. >lua

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Author: If users add their own ftplugin files (or filetype autocmds) with the sync version of `treesitter.start` then this should take precedence over the async parses, but maybe there should be a better way. I'm also not sure if reparses would still be sync in this case

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Reviewer: We do this for vimdoc and lua (and markdown hovers), which tend not to suffer from performance issues. We might keep these sync for now, and preserve async parsing for manual `vim.treesitter.start()` (and nvim-treesitter).

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Author: If we did that I don't think there would there be a way for users to opt in to asynchronous parsing of these languages though, unless these ftplugin files get ignored when using a superseding one

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Reviewer: They can stop and start in an autocommand or ftplugin? This is not meant to be permanent; just reduce the risk of unforeseen regressions after landing this. ("Principle of least surprise")

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Reviewer 2: I'm starting to feel like an option to `vim.treesitter.start()` isn't the right approach. I'd be more comfortable with something like `g:treesitter_async_disable` or introduce `vim.treesitter.config({ sync = true })`.

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Reviewer: > I'm starting to feel like an option to `vim.treesitter.start()` isn't the right approach. I'd be more comfortable with something like `g:treesitter_async_disable` or introduce `vim.treesitter.config({ sync = true })`.

In general, we _need_ more granular control. If this is only about a temporary "kill switch" in case things go pear-shaped, that's different (but should be clearly marked as such: `g:_ts_no_async`).

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Reviewer 2: For more granular we can use `b:_ts_no_async` then?

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Author: Shall I replace with the global variable configuration? (Also would this kill switch only apply to treesitter *highlighting*? If so I think the name should suggest that)

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Reviewer: > For more granular we can use `b:_ts_no_async` then?

No objection; my point about granularity only applied to a permanent interface, not a temporary testing switch.

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Reviewer 2: Ok let's just do `g:_ts_force_sync_parsing` for now.

>     local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')

Reviewer: Yep, let's start simple -- we can always add more control later on, after we've gotten initial feedback.

• New |TSNode:child_with_descendant()|, which is nearly identical to
  |TSNode:child_containing_descendant()| except that it can return the
  descendant itself.

> • |vim.treesitter.get_parser()| and |vim.treesitter.start()| no longer parse
>   the tree before returning. Users must manually ensure that the tree is
>   parsed after these functions, using |LanguageTree:parse()|.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
• |vim.treesitter.get_parser()| and |vim.treesitter.start()| no longer parse
  the tree before returning. Scripts must call |LanguageTree:parse()| explicitly. >
    local p = vim.treesitter.get_parser(0, 'c')
    p:parse()
<
```

Author: Can this be `>lua ...`?

  highlighting.
• LSP diagnostics and inlay hints are de-duplicated (new requests cancel
  inflight requests). This greatly improves performance with slow LSP servers.

> • Treesitter highlighting is now asynchronous.

Reviewer 3: let's also mention here an example showing how to  opt-out

• |treesitter-directive-trim!| can trim all whitespace (not just empty lines)
  from both sides of a node.
• |vim.treesitter.get_captures_at_pos()| now returns the `id` of each capture

> • |LanguageTree:parse()| can now take a callback which causes the parse to run
>   asynchronously, running the callback upon completion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
• |LanguageTree:parse()| optionally supports asynchronous invocation, which is
  activated by passing the `on_parse` callback parameter.
```
